CSE508: Network Security, Spring 2024

Homework 1: Passive Network Monitoring
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Submission deadline: 2/16/2024 11:59pm EDT
Submission site: https://mycourses.stonybrook.edu/d2l/home/1135717

In this assignment you will get familiar with passive network traffic
monitoring and analysis. Tcpdump is probably the most popular and widely used
passive network monitoring tool. It is built on top of the Libpcap packet
capture library and can capture and display packet headers and payloads either
from a network interface or a network trace file. Your task is to analyze a
network trace file and answer some questions.


0. Preparation

Download the hw1.pcap network trace from the "Resources" page of Piazza.

Use the following command to read the trace file: 
tcpdump -n -r hw1.pcap | head

The -n option skips the DNS resolution of IP addresses (faster output).

The output is redirected to 'head' to avoid flooding the console - this is a
good strategy while assembling your commands. Alternatively, you can use
more(1) to scroll through the output, or you can redirect all output to a text
file for further analysis.


1. Network traffic analysis with tcpdump

You can find the answers to all of the following questions using only
tcpdump's man page and shell one-liners. Most of the time you will have to use
an appropriate tcpdump filter to select a subset of packets. You may find the
following utilities useful to process further tcpdump's output: wc, grep, sed,
awk, cut, head, tail, more, sort, uniq. You are free to use any other tools
you might want (although the above are more than enough).

 1.1 How many packets does the trace contain?
 
 1.2 How many ARP packets and how many UDP packets?

 1.3 How many DHCP packets?
 
 1.4 How many packets were exchanged between 91.189.90.41 and 192.168.0.200?
 
 1.5 Print the unique source IP addresses found in the trace in numerical
     order.

 1.6 Print the unique 'private network' (according to RFC1918) source IP
     addresses found in the trace in numerical order.
 
 1.7 Print the unique destination IP addresses found in the trace in numerical
     order.
 
 1.8 What are the top-5 TCP and top-5 UDP destination ports?
 
 1.9 How many TCP packets have the SYN flag set?

1.10 How many TCP connection attempts were made?
 
1.11 Towards which ports were TCP connection attempts made? How many attempts
     per port?
 
1.12 How many HTTP GET requests were made? Print the URLs of all HTTP requests
     for JPG files.

1.13 When (date and time) was the first and last packet of the trace sent?

1.14 What is the brand of the device that sent most of the packets? What is its
     IP address?

1.15 Report the distribution of Ethernet packet sizes (how many packets of size
     X exist in the trace, for all values of X in the trace), numerically
     sorted by packet size.


2. What to submit

An plain ASCII text file with the answers to the above questions, along with
the command/script/approach used to find them.
